Bifunctor Starter pack (#310)
TinkoffCreditSystems/tofu: docs/internal/bimonad.md

```
and following properties
```
functor-id: ∀(a: C), map(F)(id a) = id b
functor-compose: ∀(a, b, c: C), ∀(f: Hom(b, c), g: Hom(a, b)),  map{F}(f ∘ g) = map{F}(f) ∘ map{F}(g)
```

Most beloved form of functors are endo-functors `Scala` -> `Scala` which interface looks like that 
```scala
trait Functor[F[_]]{
  def map[A, B](f: A => B): F[A] => F[B]
}
```
or more common in the uncurried form 
```scala
trait Functor[F[_]]{
  def map[A, B](fa: F[A])(f: A => B): F[B]
}
```
properties are assumed for implementations

there are some other interesting functors, for example
```scala
trait Invariant[F[_]]{
    def imap[A, B](fa: F[A])(f: A => B)(g: B => A): F[B]
}
```
is an interface for functors from a Scala-[core](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/core), i.e. category of all SCala isomoprphisms to Scala

Notable endofunctor for any category is identity functor `Id` such that 
```
Id(a) = a
map{Id}(f) = f
```

Also for any triple of categories C, D, E, having functors `F: D -> E`  and `G: C -> D` we can define composition of functors
```text
(F ∘ G)(a) = F(G(a))
map{F ∘ G}(f) = map{F}(map{G}(f))
```
[^1]

### Transformations

This section has a lot of unnesessary info, so you can skip it 

> Having categories C and D, natural transformation ф between functor F and G, both are functor between C and D is a family of functions

Author: ```suggestion
Having categories `C` and `D`,  functors `F, G : C -> D`,  natural transformation `ф : F -> G` 
```

```
∀(a: C), F(a) -> G(a)
```
together with property

```
naturality: ∀(a, b: C), f: Hom(a, b), ф{b} ∘ map{F}(f) = map{G}(f) ∘ ф{a}
```

in scala if we are talking about endofuctors `Scala -> Scala` we consider it having following interface

```scala
trait FunctionK[F[_], G[_]]{ 
  def apply[A](fa: F[A]): G[A]
}
```
Still `F` and `G` don't have to be Functors at all, so we can talk about just transformation (not natural) between type-constructors.[^2]

For natural transformations we can talk about identity and composition as well.
For any functor F, identity transformation is defined by
```
tid{F}{a} = id{F(a)}
```

Moreover for categories `C`, `D` and functors `F`, `G`, `H` from C to D,  (vertical) composition of transformations `ф : G -> H` and `ц : F -> G` is defined as
```text
(ф ∘ ц){a} = ф{a} ∘ ц{a}
```

> We can apply functor to transformation at whole, meaning appling elementwise, i.e. having categories

Author: ```suggestion
We can apply functor to the transformation at whole, supposing element-wise application, i.e. having categories
```

We can immediately think of any function, which result is a pair as a pair of functions, producing corresponding elements of pair.  
Meaning that `F: A -> B × C` can be represented `F_1: A -> B` and `F_2: A -> C` and `F(a) = (F_1(a), F_2(a))`.  
So a binary function from types to a pair of types we can represent as pair of type constructors.
Same trick will work for components of `pure` and `flatMap` : instead of tuple of functions as a result we define two different methods for each component
There for a bifunctor monad 
`Scala × Scala -> Scala × Scala` would look as 
```scala
trait BiMonad[L[_, _], R[_, _]]{
    def pureLeft[A, B](a: A): L[A, B]
    def pureRight[A, B](b: B): R[A, B]
    def flatMapLeft[A, B, C, D](fl: A => L[C, D], fr: B => R[C, D]): L[A, B] => L[C, D]
    def flatMapRight[A, B, C, D](fl: A => L[C, D], fr: B => R[C, D]): R[A, B] => R[C, D]
}
```
We can easily uncurry that and define bifunctors for both `L` and `R` using such definitions.

### Twin monad

Such definitions still unsettling. It hard to imagine how it could be useful having two different type-constructors. So first thing we can narrow our definition requiring that 

> `R = L`, next our definitions of `flatMapLeft` and `flatMapRight` become having identical types without any useful help on which use when, so we further require them to be identical.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`R = L`, then our definitions of `flatMapLeft` and `flatMapRight` become identical and can be further merged into one method.
```

Author: Actually no. They doesn't become identical. They have similar types, so we able to require for them to be equal.

# Bimonad tutorial

> Bifunctors have become a hot topic in scala since ZIO introduction of a second type parameter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Bifunctors have become a hot topic in the Scala community since ZIO introduced the second type parameter.
```

> Bifunctors have been a hot topic in the Scala community since ZIO introduced the second type parameter.

Author: ```suggestion
Bifunctors have become a hot topic in scala since ZIO introduction of a second type parameter.
```

It's a great way to manage business errors in your code, but it lacks suitable abstractions.

> Most comprehensive set I've seen lies here https://github.com/7mind/izumi/tree/develop/fundamentals/fundamentals-bio/src/main/scala/izumi/functional/bio.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The most comprehensive set I've seen lies [here](https://github.com/7mind/izumi/tree/develop/fundamentals/fundamentals-bio/src/main/scala/izumi/functional/bio).
```

But it's built upon practical usage.
So let's start building a more principled approach. 

## Monads

> Let's talk about basic definitions. We will use basic category theory terminology, most of this you can find in [wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monad_(functional_programming)) and [nlab](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/monad) 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's talk about the basic definitions. We will use the basic category theory terminology, most of which can be found on [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monad_(functional_programming)) and [nLab](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/monad).
```

> We will use the following definitions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We will use the following definitions.
```

### Category 

> Starting from this section we would think of Category as some entity with some additional structure.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Starting from this section, we will think of a Category as some entity with some additional structure.
```

> The class mentioned below is something like a Set or Type. Its elements are objects of the category. Since we want the object class to be arbitrary big (bigger than classical Set could be) and we do not need equality\identity relation on it, we will say _Class_

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The class mentioned below is something like a Set or a Type. Its elements are objects of the category. Since we want the object class to be arbitrary big (bigger than the classic Set could be) and we do not need equality/identity relation on it, we will name it _Class_.
```

> [Category](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category_(mathematics)) `C` is a Class called _objects_ together with indexed set family `Hom: (C, C) -> Set` and functions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A [category](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category_(mathematics)) `C` is a Class called _objects_ together with an indexed set family `Hom: (C, C) -> Set` and functions
```

```
id : ∀(a: C), Hom(a, a)

∘ : ∀{a, b, c : C}, (Hom(b, c), Hom(a, b)) -> Hom(a, c) 
```

> and following properties

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and the following properties
```

```
left-id : ∀{a, b: C}, ∀(f: Hom(a, b)), id b ∘ f = f

right-id : ∀{a, b: C}, ∀(f: Hom(a, b)), f ∘ id a = f

associativity : ∀{a, b, c, d: C}, ∀(f: Hom(c, d)), ∀(g: Hom(b, c)), ∀(h: Hom(c, d)), ∀(h: Hom(a, b)), f ∘ (g ∘ h) = (f ∘ g) ∘ h
```

> The most acknowledged category in a functional programming language is a `Set-like category of inhabitable types and pure total functions between them, so

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The most acknowledged category in a functional programming language is a `Set`-like category of inhabitable types and pure total functions between them, so the objects are types, and for types `A` and `B` `Hom(A, B)` is a set of pure functions `A => B`. For Scala, we will call it `Scala`.
```

> objects are types, and for types `A` and `B` `Hom(A, B)` is a set of pure functions `A => B`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

> For scala, we will call it `Scala`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

> Another form of a category of scala types is subtyping relations,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Another sort of category that Scala types form is subtyping relations, i.e. we have a single element `Hom(A, B)` when `A <: B` and an empty Hom otherwise.
```

> I.e. we have a single element `Hom(A, B)` when `A <: B` and empty Hom otherwise.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

### Functor

> Functor `F` between categories `C` and `D` is a function `C -> D` together with a family of functions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A functor `F` between categories `C` and `D` is a function `C -> D` together with a family of functions
```

```
map: ∀(a, b: C), Hom(a, b) -> Hom(F(a), F(b))
```

> and following properties

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and the following properties
```

```
functor-id: ∀(a: C), map(F)(id a) = id b
functor-compose: ∀(a, b, c: C), ∀(f: Hom(b, c), g: Hom(a, b)),  map{F}(f ∘ g) = map{F}(f) ∘ map{F}(g)
```

> Most beloved form of functors are endo-functors `Scala` -> `Scala` which interface looks like that 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The most beloved form of functors are endo-functors `Scala` -> `Scala`, whose interface looks like
```

```scala
trait Functor[F[_]]{
  def map[A, B](f: A => B): F[A] => F[B]
}
```

> or more common in the uncurried form 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
or more commonly in the uncurried form 
```

```
And properties are easy to prove.

### Bifunctor

Bifunctor is just a word meaning "functor from the product of categories", so bifunctor `C × D -> E` is just a functor `C × D -> E` 

Technically that means that we have a binary function on objects and 
mapping function, that mapping couple of functions into a single one.

So bifunctor `Scala × Scala -> Scala` would have following interface 
```scala
trait Bifunctor[F[_, _]]{
    def bimap[A, B, C, D](f: A => B, g: C => D): F[A, B] => F[C, D]
}
```

One notable property of bifunctors is orthogonality of mappings, meaning

```
(f, id) ∘ (id, g) = (f ∘ id, id ∘ g) = (f, g) = (id ∘ f, g ∘ id) = 
    (id, g) ∘ (f, id)
```
and for bifunctor `F` it would mean that 

```text
map{F}(f, id) ∘ map{F}(id, g) = map{F}(id, g) ∘ map{F}(f, id)
```
Which looks like some form of commutativity, but is not since `id`s have different implicit indices

But it allows to define bifunctor in the following form
```scala 
trait Bifunctor[F[_, _]]{
    def lmap[A, B, C](f: A => B): F[A, C] => F[B, C]
    def rmap[A, B, C](f: A => B): F[C, A] => F[C, A]
}
```
So we definitely may split any mappings to left and right components

### Bifunctor monad

> So what is a monad which is also bifunctor, it should be endofunctor from a product of some categories, that means that it's a functor which results also in a product of the same categories,

Author: ```suggestion
So what is a monad which is also bifunctor? It should be an endofunctor from a product of some categories, implying that it's a functor which results also in a product of these categories,
```

```
pure: ∀a: C, x: D, Hom((a, x), F(a, x))
flatMap: ∀(a, b: C), (x, y: D), Hom((a, x), F(b, y)) -> Hom(F(a, x), F(b, y))
```

But here we must remember that F is a function to a pair of objects.  
How can we represent such thing on scala types?  

> We can immediately think of any function, which results in a pair as a pair of functions, producing corresponding elements of pair.  

Author: ```suggestion
We can immediately think of any function resulting in a pair as a pair of functions, producing corresponding elements of pair.
```

Meaning that `F: A -> B × C` can be represented `F_1: A -> B` and `F_2: A -> C` and `F(a) = (F_1(a), F_2(a))`.  
So a binary function from types to a pair of types we can represent as a pair of type constructors.
Same trick will work for components of `pure` and `flatMap` : instead of tuple of functions as a result we define two different methods for each component
There for a bifunctor monad 
`Scala × Scala -> Scala × Scala` would look as 
```scala
trait BiMonad[L[_, _], R[_, _]]{
    def pureLeft[A, B](a: A): L[A, B]
    def pureRight[A, B](b: B): R[A, B]
    def flatMapLeft[A, B, C, D](fl: A => L[C, D], fr: B => R[C, D]): L[A, B] => L[C, D]
    def flatMapRight[A, B, C, D](fl: A => L[C, D], fr: B => R[C, D]): R[A, B] => R[C, D]
}
```
We can easily uncurry that and define bifunctors for both `L` and `R` using such definitions.

### Twin monad

> Such definitions are still unsettling. It is hard to imagine how it could be useful to have two different type-constructors. So first thing we can narrow our definition requiring that 

Author: ```suggestion
Such definitions are still unsettling. It is hard to imagine how it could be useful having two different type-constructors. So the most obvious way of narrowing our definition is requiring that 
```

# Bimonad tutorial

> Bifunctors are the hot theme in scala since ZIO introduction of a second type parameter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Bifunctors have been a hot topic in the Scala community since ZIO introduced the second type parameter.
```

It's a great way to design business errors in your code, but it lacks suitable abstractions.
Most comprehensive set I've seen lies here https://github.com/7mind/izumi/tree/develop/fundamentals/fundamentals-bio/src/main/scala/izumi/functional/bio.
But it built upon practical uses.

> So let's start to build more principal approach 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So let's start building a more principled approach. 
```
